>Can you start by introducing yourself?

I'm Michael Sadecky, and I was born not too far from here, at the Allegheny Valley Hospital in Natrona Heights. We are here because [Hannah] came down during the Tarentum night market and started asking questions. I was thinking about doing a documentary of [Sadecky’s_Puppets] going out of business, but my brother didn't want to participate. So it kind of didn't go anywhere.

>Like documenting what the experience was like, or…?

Yeah, like a story of a family-owned business, going out of business. And talking about what we did through the years, 39 years in business, and all the places that we went to, and, of course, we can’t talk about all of them. But we did go to 21 states, and our busiest year we did 1200 shows in one year. 

>How long is one show? 

About 40 minutes. When we started, they were half-hour shows, and then we lengthened them because by the time the kids would come in and, and leave and we did the introduction, it kind of made it almost an hour, you know, so, but 40 minutes was kind of like, the attention span of the room, you know?

>Can’t keep kids for too long. Was it all, always kids? 

No, I mean, we did shopping malls and festivals and stuff like that. In the early years, we did birthday parties, but then it became too expensive for people to afford for birthdays. Except my uncle lawyer hired us once.

>What's the longest show you've ever done?

I mean, most of our shows were around 40 minutes. And the thing was, we’d have to pack up and go somewhere else that same day. And actually, when doing 30-minute shows we used to do four schools in Beaver Falls in one day. We did two in the morning, two in the afternoon. But when they got into 40-minute shows, we could only do two in the morning and one in the afternoon. And two in the morning would have to be at the same place. Because there wasn't enough time to move. But if you're in a mall or something, sometimes there'll be like five, six shows in a day. But we didn't do a lot of that stuff. Because the malls were kind of getting out of booking entertainment at that point. And we were getting too expensive for them. But yeah, the longest we did Intergalactic Cookies twice.. 

>So most shows are sort of one-offs. Like you ran a show once a season or and then you didn't repeat the same show the next season?

Yeah there’s a lot of those. We didn't repeat any Christmas shows, except one. There were like two exceptions, one we did in a different geographical area, the next year, while we did the new one, locally. Most of our shows were received very well. There was one we did, it was called Choices. It was a trunk show. And I said, “Got this great idea!” to my brother, “Oh, let's do that, a choose-your-own-ending show”. Back then we were using cassette tapes. And we get to a certain point in the show, you turn it off. And you ask the kids, “Do you want this character to do this or this?”. And then you get the different cassette tape and you put it in, based on their choice. There were like four or five tapes that did the different combinations. Well, the kids were choosing the one where the character would either use drugs or do the wrong thing. And the teachers were like, “Our kids are terrible! They don't know what they're supposed to do”. Like, that's not the point. They say we show the consequences of the wrong choices. The point is to let them choose here. So in real life, they won't make the wrong choice. Like you know, you don't really have to get down on the kids if they choose the wrong thing, because that's part of the lesson. They just didn't get it. So that was a rough year.

>It was too innovative.

It was too heavy. Yeah. So anyway, but we had some of the schools that had us for like 30 years in a row, we were the thing every year. 

>For all your shows, did you come up with a lesson?

My brother's a writer. You know, like once upon a time, he said, “Oh, we're gonna have a rainforest scene here”. And I wrote the rainforest scene. It was basically a song and a couple of leading lines, but other than that, he wrote the shows. 

>To the experience of owning a business with your brother: do you think that like ultimately made you closer with him? Or like do you think drove you apart? Or neither?

Yes. Both. You know, you find things out that maybe you wouldn't find out if you're just seeing each other on holidays and stuff, you know. 

>Were you involved in the broader puppet community at all?

Very rarely, very rarely would we ever run into people. We were always so busy doing what we were doing, we didn't have time to go to guilds and conventions. I went to one. I learned a couple things there and met a few people. There were some rivals. We had some rivals, people that didn't like what we were doing because we came in, and we were pretty cheap in the beginning. And they lost work because we were undercutting their price. So yeah, we didn't have a lot of interaction with other puppet companies. 

>Is the puppet community something you want to get involved with now that you're sort of separate from the business aspect of things?

I'm trying to do more songwriting. And I mean, I did some videos for YouTube with a couple of puppets, but I don't foresee myself doing big projects involving puppets anymore. It's just kind of I did it with my brother. And doing it by myself, it's just different. We made a couple movies too, like we did the 48-hour movie challenge, you know about those? You have to write it, cast it, shoot it, edit it, and score it in 48 hours. 

>That sounds impossible.

Oh we did! My brother did more of them, but I did a couple with him. We were reusing puppet music in the movies because I already had written it. If you want to see, look on YouTube; you can see “The First Birthday Cake”. That was a great one, and the only reason we didn't win that is because it was turned in in the wrong format. And they played it and we even won the Audience Award but it couldn't go to the next level because it was the wrong format. I did one with the lungs puppet about an anti-smoking thing, comedy, called “Breathless”. They are only seven minutes, these movies. I’ll keep a few puppets around, in case I want to do something like that again.

>>Where does music fit into your story?

Music was always like, it's in my blood! My grandparents all played an instrument, both my parents played an instrument. My ex-wife plays an instrument, both my kids play an instrument, or more. At least one instrument. And, you know, I started playing the trumpet in fourth grade and there was a piano around... Messed around with the piano, never really had more than a couple of lessons, but got into high school and I picked up the guitar and the bass guitar. So I was always writing down little songs and stuff. Then when the puppets started, it was a great outlet. I mean, if you look at the puppet songs that I wrote, something would be happening. For instance, they used to have parking meters out here. And then they did like the two-hour parking. But the meter lady would come around and she would write down all the license plates, then come around two hours later and give everyone tickets. So we were very frustrated because we work here, and we park here. It's our building, blah, blah, blah’, you know, and we're getting tickets! And there were other things happening in Tarentum too. I just felt like, ‘I need to get out of this town! I'm stuck. I'm stuck in Tarentum’. So along comes this show—we're doing Pinocchio—Stuck inside a whale! Stuck inside a whale! It uses my life atmosphere to go into the song, to make the puppet song. There's always a hidden meaning in the songs. And the year that we stopped, this is gonna be the last Christmas show we're ever going to do, okay, we're retiring. My brother wrote a show that Santa Claus was going to retire. So everything from that was feeling like, “Oh, we're gonna retire…” And I sang, I've been doing this all these years, you know? And it's like, he’d be making toys, and I've been making puppet shows, you know, it's parallel. 

So you kind of see yourself through the puppets through the art? 

Yeah. I've worked out things when I'm in my music, whether it's relationships or situations I'm in. I write through the music and then I get to the end… I resolve it with music.

>What is the act of performing with a puppet like? And how do you give a puppet life and character?

Character? Well of course, it's all pre-recorded. So you're just like, lip synching.

>Oh, I thought it was live voices!

He gets a puppet and puts it on.

No, it's actually not live voices. It's recorded. Oh no, I had to give out the secret! It's been a while since I even put a puppet on… But it's like riding a bike.

>What’s the hardest part?

When you’re riding a bike, you don't have a guy sticking a hand up your– Anyway, he was a logo from… I don't remember what it was from the show he was in last. We still have over 300 puppets for sale.

>Is it hard to let go of the puppets?

Yeah… You know, let me clarify that sentence, because I have a problem letting go of everything. You can see my collections here. As many Funko Pops, as you see right there, I have $40,000 worth of them at home. It's over 1,000 of them. So I go through there and I'm like, “Okay, it gets more out of the collection for sale”. And then I'm like, “Oh no, I don't want to sell that one. Oh, I gotta keep that one. Oh…” But I really don't need any of them! But I do have a problem letting go of things. So, when you say letting go of the puppets, you mean actually selling them? Or just letting go of the business?

>I guess it was asking more in a sense of selling them and giving them to someone else and having it be part of their life. But I guess, if you want to speak to letting go of the business. 

Getting rid of certain puppets, yeah, they're like your kids. I remember when they did that part and that part and that—because they play multiple parts. Every year, it's, you know, this guy has a name one year and the next year it's a different name and a different voice. But the ones that you like, connect with in the beginning, seemed to be more… I have a box of puppets that I made. They're all deteriorated. And I'm like, why don't I just throw them away? I can't because that's the ones I made before this, or maybe around that time. You know, I have pieces of those puppets. They're in the box in the back. They’re not doing anybody any good. But letting go of the business is hard because it was such a part of my life for so long, and it was the outlet for writing the music. I had co-workers and people that I could, you know, spend the day with and talk about events and things. And now I'm just by myself in a store where nobody's coming.

>Is your brother still involved at all?

No, he’s living in Florida. He's been there for years. We had everything hooked up through the internet, so to speak. I figured all that stuff out. I've done all the technical stuff and all the crafty stuff up until when we hired some puppet makers, and then they made the puppets. But I was still designing all the stages and stuff like that.

>How did you kind of decide on, I guess, moving from puppets to this front, and then having the puppets in the back? Like, how did you make that decision to go with vintage toys? Was that just because you already had these collections? 

Yeah, well, I did the comic cons before the store. Before that I did, like, flea markets and you know, set up flea markets and sell stuff, but I wanted to get out of that, for obvious reasons. You know, outside you got dirt and elements and all that stuff. So when the puppets were done, I had the building and I had the inventory. I'm like, why don't I just try it as a store? Just a matter of putting it together. 

>Is this proving fruitful for you?

The store is not really making any money yet. But I'm getting collections in that I'm going to take to the Con and make money. I do three of those in Monroeville every year. That works out. The store I haven't even had the grand opening yet because I'm still working on fixtures and getting that corner done.

>Was puppeting something that you always imagined for yourself or something you always wanted to do, or how did you get into it? 

It just kind of happened. We were very young. And our parents bought us a set of little hand puppets. And we were behind the couch, making up shows when we were in grade school. And then when I was in sixth grade, I was in the Webelos, which is between the Cub Scouts and the Boy Scouts. They have a ribbon badge that you put on your uniform that had three cloth ribbons. You tried to earn little pins to go on to those ribbons. And one of them was, you could build three puppets, and I went to the library and got some books on puppets, and I built three puppets, and that was about it for then. Then I saw Jim Henson from, you know the Muppets. I saw a special he did on PBS. And he showed some behind the scenes stuff and kind of piqued my interest. I also saw the Creegan Puppets which were out of Ohio. They were doing a show at the Monroeville Mall. I was standing on the top floor looking down and watching how they came in and out with their puppets, and that kind of interested me too. So when I was 13, I started making some stages and I went out and did shows. Like two or three shows. But my first show was right across the street over there. When we started doing puppets in ‘81, we kind of went off of this picture here. I must have stared at this picture, off and on if you added up the time, probably six months of my life. Looking at this picture, getting ideas. If you see this, I have my own Kermit that I made. That's supposed to be Prairie Dawn, which is this girl here. And looking out the window there is Guy Smiley. And I think Smiley is in this picture too, I’m looking at it upside down. Oh, yeah, he's right there behind Jim Henson. That kind of looks like this guy.

>And he's behind you too. 

Yeah, that was unintentional. But that piano prop I made, he was playing the piano. This stage was very primitive, though. We went up there and we started doing the show. It was a 15-minute performance. I charged them $15. And I thought I was doing really good. But it took me two months to get the thing ready, and I made $15. What do you know when you're 13? I wasn't really a businessman. 

>That's a lot of money for a 13-year-old. 

Well, back in the 70s, yeah. So this is my brother, Jay, and I behind stage doing a show. This is like the first brochure that I did on my own. 

>Did you draw that logo on the front? 

Yeah, 1981. This is Mr. Mean Dude. He made many appearances through the years. Then this is like the newest brochure when I made this board up.

>You said Mr. Mean Dude was your favorite, right? 

Yeah. 

>Does that still ring true? 

Yeah, pretty much. He talked like this. What are you doing? My brother did the voice, but. Well, actually, Mr. Mean Dude had two different voices. When he was the actual mean dude, he talked like this, ‘I’m Mr. Mean Dude. You know, ‘stock those shelves, get those groceries out. Customers are coming’, you know, whatever. And then he also did the other one, which we used the same puppet for, but had a different voice. 

>Did you and your brother ever make puppet versions of yourselves?

Well, there was one that people said looked like me before I started dyeing my hair, so I don't want to remake that anymore. We did a show one time, a family show, for my grandparents 50th anniversary party. And it was all inside humor because of the family. But my mom looks like her two sisters. So we had the one puppet come out. And that was my mom. My Uncle Ron came out. We got the bald-headed guy. He came out with that puppet and everybody lost it. But you know, inside humor. You had to be there. 

>Can you talk about the process of making a puppet?

Yeah, you make a mouth out of wood. Most of our mouths are made out of plywood. There’s a canvas here on top of the wood, which acted like a hinge. And then I would have a canvas strap here, this is like a shammy. That was, like, a later thing that we added. I didn't really do that because the shammies deteriorate, and the ones that I made with the canvas straps are still good. Then you cut the foam out. This one was painted so it doesn't really look good. Sometimes you do the contour on there to make different shapes on the heads. And that you'll see on some of the puppets back there, they're not all flat. Some of them have dents and bumps and things like that. But, this is just material and we cut it out and shape the tongue... After you get the head, then you put the cloth over it and make it look like that. The body’s sculpted foam and then you put maybe a ring in there to keep it from collapsing. And sometimes a ring in the bottom too. And then the fingers, I’ll show you. This is our latest one. This is what it looks like inside. This was designed by a guy that went to CMU, worked for us for a while. The rod can be taken out of the hand, but the hands still got shape if you got the rod out of it. What's tough about this is, when it's inside the hand and you're trying to get that thing to go back in there like, it’s sometimes rough to do. And then we put a loop, we give them a number, then they hang upside down in the puppet box.

>Which one has the most unique backstory?

Well, I don't know. A question I always have trouble answering is what is the best or what is your favorite? I just pick one that I like, you know. I can’t do that. Because I don't want to debate in my head. 

I'm the toast of Christmas past
the first of three and a cast
I do everything that prior to today 
I'm an expert on before 
I'm the dean of you day’s yore
I'll take you back and show you yesterday 

You will learn on this night the difference between dark and light, 
Your true nature has been concealed and on this eve will be revealed 

So we leave this little tale
There’s a lot I will unveil
It will leave you all aghast
I'm the Toast of Christmas, Toast of Christmas Past 

I'm the toastess with the most-est. 

There’s the Christmas Present, Past, and the future toasts; and all we did was change their eyes to make them different. Velcro! I sold two toasts already, I think. 

>So how long does it take to make a puppet?

Oh, that would depend on what you wanted to do. Just like a basic puppet, you can probably do it in like 12, 15 hours. Some of the stuff you're gonna have to glue this and wait for it to dry and that kind of thing. So it would be spread out over a couple of days. We made a puppet for, I don’t remember the name of the company. That monkey was on a commercial for TV. We made that puppet for them. And our puppeteer did the first three commercials for them. And they were fine. And then they did not hire us to do puppeteering for the second group commercials. And it was really bad.

>Did they try and do it themselves?

They got somebody that really wasn't a very good puppeteer at all so… they get what they get. (Picks up a puppet) Hey, look, it's Mr. Mean Dude!

He–llo.. Welcome to my humble abode.

Actually, this is the grocer's voice. Now, what's interesting about my makeup, not makeup. I'm not wearing makeup. But anyway.

(changes the tone of his voice) 

Oh, I'll use my Mean Dude voice. Hey, what are you doing there? Oh, okay. I used to be a witch in the first Halloween show. And my head was perfect to put the pointy witch hat on. And we took the hat off. And we started putting hair on there. And then I was gonna put hair on the top and my wife said, No, leave it go. So here I am, slightly bald and pointy. That's the story of Mr. Mean Dude

I had someone come in and they tried to remake him. Oh, he's got a puff ball nose. You gotta take that off. And I'm like, “No, you can't. He's Mr. Mean Dude. You can’t change his nose. He has a yellow puffball nose”.

>That’s his thing!

That’s his thing! That’s right!

And then there’s Robert. Oh, Robert. See, we had a story where a boy died. And his ghost was supposed to come out and talk and you know, like, Casper-ish. But they took one look at this puppet and everybody's heart just sank. They’re like, you can't use that in a show. That's too morbid..

I thought it looked very gaunt. A little scary.I thought maybe he was not finished. But he's…

Well, he doesn't have any clothes on. But yeah, he's never had a role thanks to the fact that we premiered him in the shop here. And the select audience that we had there was horrified.

>So you ran shows out of this area? You ran shows out of this building?

No, it was just like a premier thing where we would test the show for friends and relatives. And, you know, like, if anything was wrong with it. Tell us like, can't use that puppet.

>Were there any dreams or aspirations that you had for Sadecky's Puppets that didn't come to fruition?

We made a couple of videos that didn't go anywhere. We thought about doing a TV show. But that never got off the ground because we were always so busy producing. At one time, we had eight different shows during the year. We had a Halloween show, a Thanksgiving show, a Valentine’s show, and a President's Day show. We learned the error of that. That's just too much production for one month or a short period of time, you know. So we stayed with a storybook classic, which ran all year. And we used to do drug prevention programs. But there were so many. It changed at one point, they wanted anti-bullying so that every year we'd have an anti-bullying show. And of course, a Christmas show. So those three were like how we ended. That's all we offered in the end, three shows a year.

>What was the most rewarding part, or your favorite part of owning the business?

The most rewarding for me? Well, it was a lot of fun to, in the beginning, to do the shows and hear the response. And feel the energy in the room and see all the kids smiling at you after the show and the teachers responding to all that. I used to write songs for the shows. And sometimes I spent two weeks writing one song, getting it programmed into the computer ideas, keyboard, all the orchestra sounds and everything. In the end, we didn't have as many shows, but our two puppeteers that lived near Allentown, they did shows all year long. And I went to one of their shows, to see how it was being received. And I got to sit in the bleachers. There might have been kids on the floor too. But most of the kids were behind me that were watching the show, and they were up on stage. And so the whole show was performed. And then at the end, it was like a wrap-up song. She sings a song, “I'm Glad For What I Have”. And I'm sitting there and you know, I had a good time in the studio making it and I felt good about it and all that, but as soon as she started singing, I could feel the kids all around me with the energy and the little sounds that they were making. They were so into it. Like that was the peak of you know, when you can connect with the audience like that. Whether it's the story or the song, you know, that's what makes you really feel like you did your job as an artist. But we did everything. And we made tons of mistakes. But we learned as we went, you know, you can learn a lot in 39 years. And if we knew then what we know now, we probably could have reached a lot more people. 

>Obviously we can tell that puppeteering was your calling for the 39 years you did it. 

It was definitely my outlet at the time, and of course my main job. I think I'm called to do something more for the Kingdom. I’m supposed to write Christian songs. I got a new keyboard for that. So I'm just getting started. 

>Would you do this again? 

Would I do it again? I don’t have enough years left. 

>If you could go back and choose to do this again or not…

I mean, I’d do it again. I’d just try to, you know, obviously avoid the mistakes. And yeah, I wouldn't give up the experience. I got to travel and meet a lot of people. When you start to retire and start telling people that it’s your last season, they start with their, “What can we do? You’re our favorite assembly!” It's like, you want to cry with them, but at the same time you want to go, “Yes, we did it!” You know? We made a difference! You know, during the last show we taped, it was really a hard one, I’d say.

(Singing) presents for the girls and gifts for the boys. 
Spend my whole life making children's toys
Excuse me, if I'm ready to escape the noise!
I've been doing this all these years
And I'm pretty tired. 

You know, just performing that the last time was like, “I gotta hold back the damn tears from coming through”. It was emotional. 

>Wow. I guess one final question. Do you have any quotes you live by? 

Something that I live by is… you know, everybody's going through something and I think it's important to try to understand people, and just give them the benefit of the doubt wherever they're coming from, because you didn't ever get to see eye-to-eye with everybody. But you can at least be civil to the people that you disagree with. 

>Beautifully said. 
